THE HISTORY OF MUSLIMS IN ASSAM
Syeda Mehnaz Jahan
M.A. HISTORY (2018-2020)

The Muslims is the largest minority group in Assam,   Muslim settlement in Assam is as old as the spread of Islam in India itself. During the Mughal attacks on Assam the number of the Muslims were increased there. This happened particularly with the attack of Mirjumla in 1661 A.D. One of his descendants. Khan Gandhela Garia, later took a prominent part in repelling attacks on the Ahom Kings in 1695 and announced titles of officials such as Phukan, Barua, Saikia, Bora, Hazarika and Khankar. This does not mean that only people who came from outside were Muslims; it is equally true that there was also a good number of converted Muslims of Assamese origin. The credit for preaching Islam in Assam also goes to the Muslim religious saint, popularly known as Azan Fakir, who came to Assam in approximately 1635 A.D from Baghdad. He acquired a congenial atmosphere for propagating unity between the two religious groups-the Hindus and the Muslims. Another Muslim saint namely Boga Shah who had a great influence on Assamese society, came from Uttar Pradesh.
Another factor behind the spread of Islam in Assam was the Muslim war prisoners who were allowed to settle in Assam, during various reigns. Their presence in Assam attracted the people towards the humanitarian values prevailing among them. The local people were impressed by the simplicity and logic behind the Islamic belief and way of life. ^ Sir Edward Gait (1863-1950) who served in Assam as a British member of the Indian Civil Service also has a  similar opinion on the settlement of Muslims in Assam with a little difference. He believes that Muslims were settled there only with the mercy of the then rulers not on the basis of their skill of cultivation. Gait penned his history of the Muslims of Assam in 1905. (Dr.Dev J Bimal, Lahiri Kumar Dilip, ASSAM MUSLIMS: POLITICS AND COHESION,1985)
.
 Over the years this community has evolved as an important element to the assamese culture over a long stretch of time.. The Muslims of Assam have been playing a very significant and positive role in the formation and development of Assamese society and their culture from the ancient time to today.
They are integrated by the various socio-economic and cultural factors and are spread over the length and breadth of the state, particularly in the Brahmaputra valley which is the home land of the Assamese culture. Assamese Muslims like other Muslims in India reflect significant variations in terms of culture, caste, class, language, occupation, geographical distribution and ideology. The contemporary Assamese society is fundamentally a multi-religious, multi-racial, multi-ethnic, multi-caste, multi-class and dominantly unilingual, composite and by and large a secular society. The Muslims are scattered in all the areas of Assam, with high concentration of 70.45 percent of total population in Dhubri district, western part of Assam and the lowest density of 1.48 percent in Dhemaji district as per the census report of 1991.The entire Muslim population of Assam can be classified into four major categories:- The Assamese Muslims, The Neo Assamese Muslim, The Muslims of Cachar or the Barak valley, The Bihari or North-Indian Muslims living in Assam. Rural and urban are the two broad socio-economic categories of the Muslim communities of Assam like other communities and about 95 percent of the total Muslim population of Assam living in the rural areas. Assam is a land of varieties of coloruful culture because of different race and tribes lived in Assam from ancient times and all these tribe‟s custom, tradition, living style formed a peerless Assamese culture and society. Muslim community also became a part of this formation of Assamese society and culture after settled in the land of Assam.

 M. Kar believes that, the Ahoms who ruled over Assam for over six hundred years and during whose rule most of the Muslim invasions took place, seemed to have invited Muslim professionals from Bengal to undertake architectural and other such projects which also increased the number of Muslims in Assam. According to Kar, Ahoms encouraged men from other parts of the country to settle in Assam, provided their introduction was of advantage to her. They included artisans, draftsmen, weavers, accountants, scholars and saints, both Hindus and Muslims. And, although it would seem that Kar's argument  is contrary to Gait's version of the usefulness of the Muslims in their new found home, the documentation is clear about the fact that Muslims in Assam found a place of pride in the Ahom kingdom.
The Muslims of those days were not only craftsmen, but also missionaries of Islam. Wherever they went they preached Islam in their wards and deeds. They were enthusiastic with the revolutionary and aesthetic spirit of Islam, and were responsible for different musical and architectural achievements. In this process of interaction, then literature of Assam also was influenced by the Muslims. The Muslim influence is clearly visible in Assamese songs and music and the singing of qawali ghazal and jari became familiar in Assam.
The Muslims of Assam are very close to  the Assamese Hindus in there culture and traditions. The Muslims have retained many customs and rituals of their pre- Islamic times. In social and matrimonial matters, the family dress known as mekhala chaddar has become a uniting link between the two religious communities. Even the festival Bihu, with its many rituals, has been adopted by many Assamese Muslims. These details show how close the affinity between the Assamese Hindus and Muslims was in the various cultural and social spheres of life. 


